in chapter five titled the reality of
abstractions
david explains how not everything that
exists
can be reduced to the motion of atoms
and physical forces acting upon those
particles
that is the error known as reductionism
and although it is easily refuted it or
at least
echoes of it nevertheless hold sway
in mainstream academia yes what happens
is determined by the laws of physics
acting upon particles moving in
space-time
but that is just one kind of explanation
one level if you will there are emergent
levels of explanation where things come
into existence that are
equally as real as particles space-time
and
forces but which can be fundamental
importantly
among the things our best explanations
of reality refer to
are abstractions not only things like
the objects of pure mathematics
numbers and sets and infinities of
various kinds
but also knowledge itself and these
things
can actually affect the physical world
i discussed this in my exploration of
chapter five
today i'm doing chapter five the reality
of abstractions
here we learn about the fact that
there's not only
physical material in the universe but
rather there's also some other kind of
part to reality namely there are
abstractions
and these abstractions can have real
causal effects
on physical things like atoms
the reason why something like that ends
up taking the shape that it does
has nothing to do with self-organization
and physical forces
it cannot be explained purely in terms
of the motion of atoms and it can't be
reduced
to laws of motion or any kind of law of
physics
instead the explanation is that a great
architect
called gowdy some 100 years ago
decided to create something like that
the idea was originally represented
inside of his mind
the idea was originally some kind of
neural firings inside of his brain
but they can't be reduced to that either
it was an idea an abstract idea
he had plans he put it down on paper and
then
over many many years it's beginning to
take form
or beginning to be instantiated in
the rock and stone and mortar and other
materials that make up
an absolutely phenomenal building like
this one
it's only partially complete and
apparently it's going to be some decades
before it finally
is this is in barcelona spain
so with a great building something like
gowdy's cathedral
what we have is an idea that has somehow
taken
physical form so what we're saying there
is
ideas which are abstractions knowledge
which is an abstraction can have real
physical
effects in the world ideas can take
physical form abstractions can be
instantiated
in the physical world but are there
different
kinds of abstractions does an
abstraction
have to be instantiated so we say in a
physical substrate
in matter or something like matter like
light or sound waves does it have to be
instantiated
in order to be an abstraction well i
asked david about different kinds of
abstractions
now you mentioned in that answer there
the concept of abstractions and you
actually invoked abstractions in in
talking about it of course pure
mathematics is about
abstractions and i don't know what might
be the most controversial chapter in the
book but i think among
intellectual types to at least some
extent
it would be chapter five if it's not
going to be the why
flower is a beautiful chapter it's going
to be the one that claims there is a
reality to
abstractions because to some people this
seems
weirdly enough you know not to me i
think not most people listening to this
but it can sound like an appeal to the
supernatural or
some sort of woo because some people
are physicalists they think that
everything just has to come down
to the behavior of atoms but i wanted to
ask you if you distinguish between
kinds of abstractions rather than
defending the thesis that abstractions
are real
i know this is not necessarily a
well-defined area but for example
something like
numbers they're abstractions are they
different
in kind to let's say knowledge
because after all there may be
infinitely well there are infinitely
many prime numbers
and not all of those prime numbers ever
need to be instantiated in a physical
substrate anywhere
nevertheless they still exist but
knowledge to be
knowledge has to be extension
instantiated in a physical substrate
it's also abstract but well i might pull
the breaks there
can you explain if there are these
different species of abstractions
and if so how do we understand the
differences in their existence
yes uh there are different species of
abstractions
i mean maybe it's better to say there
there is a classification of
abstractions and
some classifications are quite useful uh
because uh abstractions within the same
category of classification have similar
properties and can be understood with
similar explanations or the same
explanation but then with the different
problem situations you might want to
classify things differently
like you know just like in biology we
may wish to sometimes we want to
classify things as
mammals and birds and reptiles and so on
and on other occasions we may
want to classify them as aquatic
creatures and terrestrial creatures and
aerial creatures and so on so
classifications are useful relative to
the problems
that they are that you want to talk
about and it's the same with
abstractions
it's definitely true that some
abstractions as you say like knowledge
and information more generally don't
exist
unless they're instantiated so they have
to have this extra element of being
instantiated
but that that's also true of there are
there are more classifications than that
even
even among pure abstractions there there
are abstractions that
well it it's it seems to be important in
mathematics to
like i said to distinguish between
abstractions that involve infinite sets
and abstractions that don't
uh and then the whole idea of a set
is is not universally applicable so the
set of all sets
it famously turned out even before godel
it turned out that this
from russell that it it turned out that
the setable sets
isn't a set um so you then you have to
invoke
a class it's just a class of things the
set of all sets that don't contain
itself
so there's that's right so that there's
but
it doesn't help because there's it
doesn't help with everything
because uh there's no such thing as the
class of all classes either
right so yes there there are different
kinds of things
and another thing which which i think is
still slightly mysterious is
what kind of an abstraction the laws of
physics are
so there'll be more to say about that
the laws of physics
in another episode but for now for more
on this
see the rest of my two-part exploration
of the beginning of infinity chapter 5
the reality of abstractions that's
available on
youtube and via podcast as i say it
might be one of the more controversial
chapters of the book
i don't know why exactly but like i
hinted at there may be echoes that
remain of a
physicalist notion which was i guess a
reaction against
people who invoked the supernatural and
people who reacted against
religious or magical type thinking they
threw out
the gods the spirits the magic but with
that bathwater went i think the baby
of a whole class of things quite real
and yet
not reducible to fundamental particles
accepting the reality of abstractions
enables the explanation of many
phenomena
that are otherwise entirely mysterious
and inexplicable
the denial of them is just a kind of
reductionist or empiricist mistake
it solves nothing and ruins what we do
know about the nature of reality
it reminds me a little of the shut up
and calculate
people in physics who are supposed to be
the hard-nosed
macho skeptical types who say quantum
theory allows predictions
what more do you want well what we want
is to
understand what's going on it's not very
skeptical
scientific or macho to give up on that
in fact it's anti-rational it
impedes progress abstractions are real
as real as atoms are and dinosaurs were
get over it
you